[Docs][KubeRay] Add YuniKorn Gang scheduling doc (#47850)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/k8s-ecosystem/yunikorn.md

(kuberay-yunikorn)=
# KubeRay integration with Apache YuniKorn

[Apache YuniKorn](https://yunikorn.apache.org/) is a light-weight, universal resource scheduler for container orchestrator systems. It is created to achieve fine-grained resource sharing for various workloads efficiently on a large scale, multi-tenant, and cloud-native environment. YuniKorn brings a unified, cross-platform, scheduling experience for mixed workloads that consist of stateless batch workloads and stateful services.

> KubeRay's Apache YuniKorn integration enables more efficient scheduling of Ray pods in multi-tenant Kubernetes environments.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
KubeRay's Apache YuniKorn integration enables more efficient scheduling of Ray Pods in multi-tenant Kubernetes environments.
```

> 

Reviewer: Can you add a section `Prerequisites` between "KubeRay integration with Apache YuniKorn" and "Setup"? The section should mention which KubeRay version should be used (v1.2.2 or newer) and the API status (alpha for KubeRay v1.2.2). See https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/rayservice-quick-start.html as an example.

## Setup

### Step 1: Create a Kubernetes cluster with KinD
Run the following command in a terminal:

```shell
kind create cluster
```

### Step 2: Install Apache YuniKorn

You need to successfully install Apache YuniKorn on your Kubernetes cluster before enabling Apache YuniKorn integration with KubeRay.
See [Get Started](https://yunikorn.apache.org/docs/) for Apache YuniKorn installation instructions.

### Step 3: Install the KubeRay Operator with Apache YuniKorn support

Deploy the KubeRay Operator with the `--enable-batch-scheduler` flag to enable Volcano batch scheduling support.

When installing KubeRay Operator using Helm, you should use one of these two options:

* Set `batchScheduler.name` to `yunikorn` in your
[`values.yaml`](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/df5577fe1b3f537f36dbda3870b4743edd2f11bb/helm-chart/kuberay-operator/values.yaml#L83)
file:
```shell
# values.yaml file
batchScheduler:
    name: yunikorn
```

> * Pass the `--set batchScheduler.name=yunikorn` flag when running on the command line:

Reviewer: This option is enough. Remove the first option.

```shell
# Install the Helm chart with --enable-batch-scheduler flag set to true

> helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator --namespace ray-system --version 1.2.2 --create-namespace --set batchScheduler.name=yunikorn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator --version 1.2.2 --set batchScheduler.name=yunikorn
```

```

### Step 4: Use Apache YuniKorn for batch scheduling

> ## Example

Reviewer: Should we move `## Example` above `### Step 4`?

> ### Gang scheduling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Gang scheduling for RayCluster with Apache YuniKorn
```

This example walks through how gang scheduling works with Apache YuniKorn and KubeRay.

First, create a queue with a capacity of 4 CPUs and 6Gi of RAM by editing the ConfigMap:

> Run `kubectl edit configmap -n yunikorn yunikorn-defaults`

Reviewer: Is the ConfigMap `yunikorn-defaults` created by YuniKorn? If so, would you mind mentioning it?

Add a `queues.yaml` config to under the `data` key, the final ConfigMap should look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  # Metadata for the ConfigMap, skip for brevity
data:
  queues.yaml: |
    partitions:
      - name: default
        queues:
          - name: root
            queues:
              - name: test
                submitacl: "*"
                parent: false
                resources:
                  guaranteed:
                    memory: 6G
                    vcore: 4
                  max:
                    memory: 6G
                    vcore: 4
```

Save the changes and exit the editor. This configuration creates a queue named `root.default` with a capacity of 4 CPUs and 6Gi of RAM.

Next, create a RayCluster with a head node (1 CPU + 2Gi of RAM) and two workers (1 CPU + 1Gi of RAM each), for a total of 3 CPU and 4Gi of RAM:

```shell
# Path: kuberay/ray-operator/config/samples

> # Includes the necessary labels for the Apache YuniKorn scheduler gang scheduling:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Configure the necessary labels on the RayCluster custom resource for Apache YuniKorn scheduler's gang scheduling:
```

# - `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled`
# - `yunikorn.apache.org/app-id`
# - `yunikorn.apache.org/queue`

> wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/v1.2.2/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml

Reviewer: Use the master branch instead. We may not be able to merge the YAML into v1.2.2 in time.

kubectl apply -f ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: Could we briefly explain these three labels so that users understand how to configure them? For example, it's not clear why `yunikorn.apache.org/queue` should be set to `root.test`.

```yaml
labels:
  ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled: "true"
  yunikorn.apache.org/app-id: test-yunikorn-0
  yunikorn.apache.org/queue: root.test
```

Because the queue has a capacity of 4 CPU and 6Gi of RAM, this resource should schedule successfully without any issues.

```shell
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
test-yunikorn-0-head-98fmp            1/1     Running   0          67s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-42tgg   1/1     Running   0          67s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-467mn   1/1     Running   0          67s

> ```

Reviewer: Could you also add a section asking readers to confirm whether the RayCluster's labels are successfully propagated to the Ray Pods (head and workers)? You can refer to https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/pull/2396#pullrequestreview-2332622026.

It's important to enable readers to troubleshoot by themselves.

Next, add an additional RayCluster with the same configuration of head and worker nodes, but with a different name:

```shell
# Path: kuberay/ray-operator/config/samples

> # Includes the `ray.io/scheduler-name: volcano` and `volcano.sh/queue-name: kuberay-test-queue` labels in the metadata.labels

Reviewer: `volcano`?

> # Replaces the name to test-yunikorn-1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Replace the name with `test-yunikorn-1`
```

sed 's/test-yunikorn-0/test-yunikorn-1/' ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml | kubectl apply -f-
```

Now all the pods for `test-yunikorn-1` are in the `Pending` state:

```shell
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
test-yunikorn-0-head-98fmp                1/1     Running   0          4m22s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-42tgg       1/1     Running   0          4m22s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-467mn       1/1     Running   0          4m22s
test-yunikorn-1-head-xl2r5                0/1     Pending   0          71s
test-yunikorn-1-worker-worker-l6ttz       0/1     Pending   0          71s
test-yunikorn-1-worker-worker-vjsts       0/1     Pending   0          71s

> tg-test-yunikorn-1-headgroup-vgzvoot0dh   0/1     Pending   0          69s

Reviewer: What's `tg-test-yunikorn-1`?

tg-test-yunikorn-1-worker-eyti2bn2jv      1/1     Running   0          69s
tg-test-yunikorn-1-worker-k8it0x6s73      0/1     Pending   0          69s
```

> Because the new cluster requires more CPU and RAM than our queue allows, even though one of the pods would fit in the remaining 1 CPU and 2Gi of RAM, none of the cluster's pods are placed until there is enough room for all the pods. Without using Volcano for gang scheduling in this way, one of the pods would ordinarily be placed, leading to the cluster being partially allocated, and some jobs (like [Horovod](https://github.com/horovod/horovod) training) being stuck waiting for resources to become available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the new cluster requires more CPU and RAM than our queue allows, even though one of the pods would fit in the remaining 1 CPU and 2Gi of RAM, none of the cluster's pods are placed until there is enough room for all the pods. Without using YuniKorn for gang scheduling in this way, one of the pods would ordinarily be placed, leading to the cluster being partially allocated, and some jobs (like [Horovod](https://github.com/horovod/horovod) training) being stuck waiting for resources to become available.
```

> Because the new cluster requires more CPU and RAM than our queue allows, even though one of the pods would fit in the remaining 1 CPU and 2Gi of RAM, none of the cluster's pods are placed until there is enough room for all the pods. Without using Volcano for gang scheduling in this way, one of the pods would ordinarily be placed, leading to the cluster being partially allocated, and some jobs (like [Horovod](https://github.com/horovod/horovod) training) being stuck waiting for resources to become available.

Reviewer: why do we mention https://github.com/horovod/horovod? Do we use any Horovod example here?

> Delete the first RayCluster to make space in the queue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete the first RayCluster to free up computing resources in the queue:
```

```shell
kubectl delete raycluster test-yunikorn-0
```

> Now all the pods for the second cluster changed to the `Running` state, because enough resources are now available to schedule the entire set of pods:

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
Now all the Pods for the second cluster changed to the `Running` state, because enough resources are now available to schedule the entire set of Pods:
```

> Check the pods again to see that the second cluster is now up and running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the Pods again to see that the second cluster is now up and running:
```

Add a `queues.yaml` config to under the `data` key, the final ConfigMap should look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  # Metadata for the ConfigMap, skip for brevity
data:
  queues.yaml: |
    partitions:
      - name: default
        queues:
          - name: root
            queues:
              - name: test
                submitacl: "*"
                parent: false
                resources:
                  guaranteed:
                    memory: 6G
                    vcore: 4
                  max:
                    memory: 6G
                    vcore: 4
```

Save the changes and exit the editor. This configuration creates a queue named `root.test` with a capacity of 4 CPUs and 6Gi of RAM.

Next, create a RayCluster with a head node (1 CPU + 2Gi of RAM) and two workers (1 CPU + 1Gi of RAM each), for a total of 3 CPU and 4Gi of RAM:

```shell
# Path: kuberay/ray-operator/config/samples
# Configure the necessary labels on the RayCluster custom resource for Apache YuniKorn scheduler's gang scheduling:
# - `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled`: This should be set to `true` to enable gang scheduling.

> # - `yunikorn.apache.org/app-id`: This should be set to the name of the RayCluster.

Reviewer 2: It is OK to set with the name of the RayCluster, but since this will be used as the indentifier as the app in the scheduler, we should explicitly say make sure the name doesn't conflict with others existing Ray clusters (even in other namespace). One caveat is, we can have the same RayCluster name in different namespaces, but if that same name is used, these RayClusters will be considered as belonging to the same application in the yunikorn scheduler.

Author: done

# - `yunikorn.apache.org/queue`: This should be set to the name of one of the queues in Apache YuniKorn.
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml
kubectl apply -f ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml
```

Check the RayCluster that was created:

```shell
$ kubectl describe raycluster test-yunikorn-0

Name:         test-yunikorn-0
Namespace:    default
Labels:       ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled=true
              yunikorn.apache.org/app-id=test-yunikorn-0
              yunikorn.apache.org/queue=root.test
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  ray.io/v1
Kind:         RayCluster
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2024-09-29T09:52:30Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    951
  UID:                 cae1dbc9-5a67-4b43-b0d9-be595f21ab85
# Other fields are skipped for brevity
````

> Note the labels on the RayCluster: `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled=true`, `yunikorn.apache.org/app-id=test-yunikorn-0`, and `yunikorn.apache.org/queue=root.test`.

Reviewer 2: can we add a note after this section:

:::{note}

The "ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled" label is only needed when Gang Scheduling is required. If this label is not set, the Ray cluster will be scheduled by YuniKorn without enforcing Gang Scheduling.

Author: done

(kuberay-yunikorn)=

# KubeRay integration with Apache YuniKorn

> [Apache YuniKorn](https://yunikorn.apache.org/) is a light-weight, universal resource scheduler for container orchestrator systems. It's created to achieve fine-grained resource sharing for various workloads efficiently on a large scale, multi-tenant, and cloud-native environment. YuniKorn brings a unified, cross-platform, scheduling experience for mixed workloads that consist of stateless batch workloads and stateful services.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Apache YuniKorn](https://yunikorn.apache.org/) is a light-weight, universal resource scheduler for container orchestrator systems. It performs fine-grained resource sharing for various workloads efficiently on a large scale, multi-tenant, and cloud-native environment. YuniKorn brings a unified, cross-platform, scheduling experience for mixed workloads that consist of stateless batch workloads and stateful services.
```

KubeRay's Apache YuniKorn integration enables more efficient scheduling of Ray Pods in multi-tenant Kubernetes environments.

:::{note}

> This feature requires KubeRay version 1.2.2 or newer, and it's still alpha.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This feature requires KubeRay version 1.2.2 or newer, and it's in alpha testing.
```

:::

## Step 1: Create a Kubernetes cluster with KinD
Run the following command in a terminal:

```shell
kind create cluster
```

## Step 2: Install Apache YuniKorn

You need to successfully install Apache YuniKorn on your Kubernetes cluster before enabling Apache YuniKorn integration with KubeRay.
See [Get Started](https://yunikorn.apache.org/docs/) for Apache YuniKorn installation instructions.

## Step 3: Install the KubeRay operator with Apache YuniKorn support

> When installing KubeRay operator using Helm, you should pass the `--set batchScheduler.name=yunikorn` flag when running on the command line:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When installing KubeRay operator using Helm, pass the `--set batchScheduler.name=yunikorn` flag at the command line:
```

```shell
helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator --version 1.2.2 --set batchScheduler.name=yunikorn
```

## Step 4: Use Apache YuniKorn for gang scheduling

> This example walks through how gang scheduling works with Apache YuniKorn and KubeRay.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example uses gang scheduling with Apache YuniKorn and KubeRay.
```

First, create a queue with a capacity of 4 CPUs and 6Gi of RAM by editing the ConfigMap:

Run `kubectl edit configmap -n yunikorn yunikorn-defaults`

> This `ConfigMap` is created during the installation of the Apache YuniKorn Helm chart.

Reviewer 3: Can we reword this sentence to use an active voice? Who creates the `ConfigMap`? For example, if it's KubeRay, we can rewrite this way:

"KubeRay creates the `ConfigMap` during the installation of the Apache YuniKorn Helm chart."

Author: Changed it to "Helm creates this ConfigMap during the installation of the Apache YuniKorn Helm chart."

> Add a `queues.yaml` config to under the `data` key, the final ConfigMap should look like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add a `queues.yaml` config under the `data` key. The `ConfigMap` should look like the following:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:

>   # Metadata for the ConfigMap, skip for brevity

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # Metadata for the ConfigMap, skip for brevity.
```

data:
  queues.yaml: |
    partitions:
      - name: default
        queues:
          - name: root
            queues:
              - name: test
                submitacl: "*"
                parent: false
                resources:
                  guaranteed:
                    memory: 6G
                    vcore: 4
                  max:
                    memory: 6G
                    vcore: 4
```

Save the changes and exit the editor. This configuration creates a queue named `root.test` with a capacity of 4 CPUs and 6Gi of RAM.

> Next, create a RayCluster with a head node (1 CPU + 2Gi of RAM) and two workers (1 CPU + 1Gi of RAM each), for a total of 3 CPU and 4Gi of RAM:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, create a RayCluster with a head node with 1 CPU and 2GB of RAM, and two workers with 1 CPU and 1GB of RAM each, for a total of 3 CPU and 4GB of RAM:
```

```shell
# Path: kuberay/ray-operator/config/samples
# Configure the necessary labels on the RayCluster custom resource for Apache YuniKorn scheduler's gang scheduling:

> # - `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled`: This should be set to `true` to enable gang scheduling.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# - `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled`: Set to `true` to enable gang scheduling.
```

> # - `yunikorn.apache.org/app-id`: This should be set to a unique identifier for the application in Kubernetes, even across different namespaces.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# - `yunikorn.apache.org/app-id`: Set to a unique identifier for the application in Kubernetes, even across different namespaces.
```

> # - `yunikorn.apache.org/queue`: This should be set to the name of one of the queues in Apache YuniKorn.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# - `yunikorn.apache.org/queue`: Set to the name of one of the queues in Apache YuniKorn.
```

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml
kubectl apply -f ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml
```

> Check the RayCluster that was created:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check the RayCluster that KubeRay created:
```

Reviewer 3: Not sure if it was KubeRay that created it, but I suggest you be precise to avoid the ambiguity from the passive voice.

```shell
$ kubectl describe raycluster test-yunikorn-0

Name:         test-yunikorn-0
Namespace:    default
Labels:       ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled=true
              yunikorn.apache.org/app-id=test-yunikorn-0
              yunikorn.apache.org/queue=root.test
Annotations:  <none>
API Version:  ray.io/v1
Kind:         RayCluster
Metadata:
  Creation Timestamp:  2024-09-29T09:52:30Z
  Generation:          1
  Resource Version:    951
  UID:                 cae1dbc9-5a67-4b43-b0d9-be595f21ab85
# Other fields are skipped for brevity
````

Note the labels on the RayCluster: `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled=true`, `yunikorn.apache.org/app-id=test-yunikorn-0`, and `yunikorn.apache.org/queue=root.test`.

:::{note}

> The `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled` label is only needed when Gang Scheduling is required. If this label is not set, the Ray cluster will be scheduled by YuniKorn without enforcing Gang Scheduling.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You only need the `ray.io/gang-scheduling-enabled` label when you require gang scheduling. If you don't set this label, YuniKorn schedules the Ray cluster without enforcing gang scheduling.
```

:::

> Because the queue has a capacity of 4 CPU and 6Gi of RAM, this resource should schedule successfully without any issues.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because the queue has a capacity of 4 CPU and 6GB of RAM, this resource should schedule successfully without any issues.
```

Author: GB is different from GiB. I've changed it to GiB

```shell
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
test-yunikorn-0-head-98fmp            1/1     Running   0          67s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-42tgg   1/1     Running   0          67s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-467mn   1/1     Running   0          67s
```

> You can verify it by checking the [Apache YuniKorn dashboard](https://yunikorn.apache.org/docs/#access-the-web-ui).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Verify the scheduling by checking the [Apache YuniKorn dashboard](https://yunikorn.apache.org/docs/#access-the-web-ui).
```

```shell
kubectl port-forward svc/yunikorn-service 9889:9889 -n yunikorn
```

> And then go to http://localhost:9889/#/applications to see the running applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Go to `http://localhost:9889/#/applications` to see the running apps.
```

![Apache YuniKorn dashboard](../images/yunikorn-dashboard-apps-running.png)

Next, add an additional RayCluster with the same configuration of head and worker nodes, but with a different name:

```shell

> # Replace the name with `test-yunikorn-1`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Replace the name with `test-yunikorn-1`.
```

sed 's/test-yunikorn-0/test-yunikorn-1/' ray-cluster.yunikorn-scheduler.yaml | kubectl apply -f-
```

Now all the Pods for `test-yunikorn-1` are in the `Pending` state:

```shell
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
test-yunikorn-0-head-98fmp                1/1     Running   0          4m22s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-42tgg       1/1     Running   0          4m22s
test-yunikorn-0-worker-worker-467mn       1/1     Running   0          4m22s
test-yunikorn-1-head-xl2r5                0/1     Pending   0          71s
test-yunikorn-1-worker-worker-l6ttz       0/1     Pending   0          71s
test-yunikorn-1-worker-worker-vjsts       0/1     Pending   0          71s
tg-test-yunikorn-1-headgroup-vgzvoot0dh   0/1     Pending   0          69s
tg-test-yunikorn-1-worker-eyti2bn2jv      1/1     Running   0          69s
tg-test-yunikorn-1-worker-k8it0x6s73      0/1     Pending   0          69s
```

> Those Pods that prefixed with `tg-` are created by Apache YuniKorn for gang scheduling purpose.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Apache YuniKorn  creates the Pods with the `tg-` prefix for gang scheduling purpose.
```

> Go to http://localhost:9889/#/applications and then you can see `test-yunikorn-1` is in the `Accepted` state but not running yet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Go to `http://localhost:9889/#/applications` and to see `test-yunikorn-1` in the `Accepted` state but not running yet:
```

![Apache YuniKorn dashboard](../images/yunikorn-dashboard-apps-pending.png)

> Because the new cluster requires more CPU and RAM than the queue allows, even though one of the Pods would fit in the remaining 1 CPU and 2Gi of RAM, none of the cluster's Pods are placed until there is enough room for all the Pods. Without using Apache YuniKorn for gang scheduling in this way, one of the Pods would ordinarily be placed, leading to the cluster being partially allocated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because the new cluster requires more CPU and RAM than the queue allows, even though one of the Pods would fit in the remaining 1 CPU and 2GB of RAM, KubeRay doesn't place the cluster's Pods until there's enough room for all of the Pods. Without using Apache YuniKorn for gang scheduling in this way, KubeRay would place one of the Pods, and only partially allocating the cluster.
```

Delete the first RayCluster to free up resources in the queue:

```shell
kubectl delete raycluster test-yunikorn-0
```

> Now all the Pods for the second cluster changed to the `Running` state, because enough resources are now available to schedule the entire set of Pods:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now all the Pods for the second cluster change to the `Running` state, because enough resources are now available to schedule the entire set of Pods:
```
